You and I make a lot of decisions every day.
Now, some have a little impact on our lives,
others have a very big impact.
And we can appreciate that we can make choices
and decisions for ourselves.
Think of how life would be if you made no decisions
for yourself.
Someone tells you when to go to bed.
They pick out your clothes,
and they tell you what to do for work.
Well, none of us would like that.
Jehovah gave each of us free will,
and that's the precious gift of making choices for ourselves.
Now, if you ever thought about why Jehovah gave us this gift,
I mean, why trust us with free will
when he knew that we could make bad choices or decisions?
A one-powerful reason is love.
The only way to give us the gift of love
is also to give us the gift of free will.
The two are tied together.
You really can't have one without the other.
For example, if I program my computer,
they give me a message every day at 2PM,
John, I love you.
I think you're a wonderful guy.
I think there'd be a little something wrong
with me if I thought, oh, isn't that nice.
My computer, it loves me.
Yeah, love only exists if it comes truly
from a free will expression.
Now, did Jehovah place any boundaries on free will?
Yes, they were stated in the law to the nation of Israel.
And Jesus later repeated them at Matthew chapter 22
verses 37 through 40.
He said to him,
you must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart
and with your whole soul and with your whole mind.
This is the greatest and first commandment.
The second, like it is this,
you must love your neighbor as yourself.
On these two commandments,
the whole law hangs and the prophets.
So our use of free will has love of God
and love of neighbor as its boundaries.
I mean, notice, for example,
what people are doing in this picture,
both inside the circle,
boundary and outside.
See, free will allows us to do any of the things
we see in the picture.
But love of God and love of neighbor
move us to reject what's outside the circle
and choose to do the kinds of things
that we see inside the circle.
Now, to stay within those boundaries,
Jehovah gave us a marvelous brain
and a built-in conscience,
but he also knows we need more help.
And that's why he also gave us Bible principles,
basic truths from the Bible
that can help us to make good decisions.
And it can safely be said
that any decision we face can be guided
by Bible principles.
Now, our creator, Jehovah,
knows what's best for us.
And he also trusts us to make decisions
based on Bible principles.
Because he knows that when we do that,
then we're really truly going to be happy, content
and at peace with him and with others.
So in review so far,
Jehovah gave us free will.
That's the privilege to make choices for ourselves.
And he also gave us Bible principles
as the boundaries to our choices.
But making difficult decisions
requires that we train ourselves
to recognize Bible principles and apply them.
Now let's read Romans chapter 12 and verse 1.
And let's see how this verse describes
the decision making a process.
Therefore, I appeal to you
by the compassion of God-brothers
to present your bodies as a living sacrifice,
holy and acceptable to God,
a sacred service with your power of reason.
So are we using our power of reason
to understand Bible principles?
For example, young children ask lots of questions.
But as a child ever asked you,
what happens when I drop a ball?
A pencil?
A book?
No, they don't ask that.
They know what happens to anything they drop.
It falls down.
See, the child doesn't need rules for every object
but has quickly grasped the principle.
Anything he drops falls down.
Now, what if an 18-year-old asks you,
what's going to happen when I drop this pen?
Well, it's obvious he's not been paying attention
to basic principles of life.
So by us paying attention to Bible principles,
we can very quickly see the pattern
of love of God and love of neighbor.
And know the right thing to do
without a long list of rules for every situation.
Well, how can we train our power of reason?
We train it by paying attention
as we read and study the Bible.
Now, we don't need rules for which movies to watch,
which songs to listen to,
or what clothes we can wear.
If we're paying attention when we're reading the Bible,
we train our conscience with Bible principles
so we can make such decisions
without needing a long list of rules.
You know, we could compare our training,
our power of reason,
to a blind person using a guide dog.
Now, an untrained dog would be very helpful
to a blind person.
It would bark when others were around, for example.
However, a dog trained in specific skills
is amazingly helpful.
The dog knows when to stop at curbs,
walk around obstacles that the person right
run their head into.
A guide dog is also taught a skill called
intelligent disobedience.
And even if the blind person encourages the dog forward,
it won't obey,
but it'll pull the person back from danger.
Now, it can take a year or more
of training for the dog to learn the amazing skills
that are so helpful to a blind person.
Likewise, our raw untrained power of reason
can help us to a degree.
However, it can be amazing
if we take the time to train it.
Now, here are three skills
that we can use to train our power of reason.
They are illustrating,
analyzing, and balancing.
Now, to consider our first skill illustrating,
let's use the general topic of forgiveness.
What Bible principles could help with forgiveness?
Please think of as many principles and scriptures as you can.
Now, if it helps, you can pause the program now
and write down the principles that come to mind.
Now, your list may include principles like these.
Matthew 18, 22 says,
to forgive up to 77 times.
Proverbs 12, 18 says,
the tongue of the wise is a healing.
And Colossians 3, verse 13 tells us
to forgive one another freely.
Now, the skill we want to learn is illustrating,
creating a mental picture of an idea or principle
to see its real meaning and impact.
Now, even if we are not skilled artists,
all of us can and do create pictures in our minds.
When illustrating, pay attention to things that are similar
or like the thing you're trying to visualize.
For example, if sin is like dead,
then forgiveness is like someone cancelling the dead.
If a hurtful remark is like a cut,
then forgiveness is like seeing it heal.
If sin is like a mark on a blackboard,
forgiveness is like erasing it.
A Proverbs 12 and verse 18 is a great example
of using the like technique.
Thoughtless speech is like the stabs of a sword,
but the tongue of the wise is a healing.
Imagine what your skin would look like
if you still had every open cut,
bruise or bleeding scratch since childhood.
See, Jehovah wonderfully designed our body
to heal such minor cuts and bruises.
And we can now visualize how the forgiveness of others
helps us to heal emotionally.
Now, learning to illustrate or visualize
takes time and practice.
However, it can be one of the most powerful skills
we use to train our power of reason.
And it can also be quite enjoyable.
You know, try at your family worship
to take the principles for a topic
and see how many similarities or likes you can come up with.
Now, granted, they all won't be amazing,
but you may be surprised by the insights
that come from seeing something from a new perspective.
Well, let's consider now our second skill, analyzing.
Now, analyzing something means examining it carefully,
in detail, and let's use the topic of wrong desires.
Now, in this case, let's say we've already found
the principle at Colossians chapter three and verse five,
deaden, therefore, your body members
that are on the earth as respect sexual immorality,
uncleanness, uncontrolled sexual passion,
hurtful desire and greediness, which is idolatry.
Now, what can we learn from analyzing Colossians chapter three
and verse five to help when we struggle with wrong desires?
Again, feel free to pause the program
if you want some time to think about it.
Look carefully at each step outlined.
Did you notice, for example,
what appears to be a reverse order
of the steps leading to sin?
This verse works its way from sexual immorality
back to the very roots of the problem.
Now, let's take each phrase starting with the last,
greediness, which is idolatry.
So sexual immorality starts with selfishness,
greedily putting our needs ahead of anything else.
Next is hurtful desire.
Greediness leads to hurtful desire.
It's like a person hanging around a bakery,
smelling the bread and cakes when he can't pay for it.
Likewise, hanging around immoral entertainment
or bad associates can feed hurtful desire
for what is not ours.
Next is listed uncontrolled sexual passion.
So hurtful desire has now turned from an idea
into a strong emotion of passion,
causing one to look for an opportunity to fulfill the desire.
Next, uncleanness.
The previous steps have now led to inappropriate,
physical contact with another person.
Finally, sexual immorality, serious sin.
Sexual immoralities occurred between persons
that are not married to one another.
So analyzing Colossians chapter three and verse five
can really help us to eliminate,
not stimulate wrong desires.
And we can see how important it is
to get rid of wrong desires immediately.
It's easier to walk away from sin
when we're still in the early stages rather than later.
So we need to practice a skill of not simply just
reading scriptures, but analyzing them
until we've learned all that we can.
And we can use the many research tools
we have to find valuable comments and application.
Now let's consider our third and final skill balancing.
And to do that, let's use a question
on the topic of alcohol.
What Bible principles could help a couple to decide
whether to serve alcohol at their wedding?
What principles and scriptures do you think
would help them make a balanced decision?
Again, you're welcome to pause the program.
And if you'd like to write down
what comes to mind or to research something.
Now your list probably has some of these principles.
At John chapter two and verse nine,
Jesus made wine for a wedding.
However, first Corinthians chapter six and verse 10 says
that drunkards will not inherit the kingdom.
And first Corinthians 10, 31 and 32 says,
whether you're eating or drinking,
do all things for God's glory.
And to keep from becoming causes for stumbling.
Now it doesn't seem that any one principle
provides the answer.
The couple could simply say,
well, Jesus served wine at a wedding, so can we do?
However, there's really more to it than that, isn't there?
It's clear that a balance
of all these Bible principles is needed.
Will relatives or others be there
who might be prone to over drinking?
Would serving alcohol bother the conscience
of many present because of local customs
and feelings about alcohol?
It's often the case when making decisions
that we need to balance several Bible principles
not taking any one principle solely on its own merit.
Jehovah expects us to use our power of reason
to balance Bible principles and make good decisions.
Ecclesiastes chapter seven and verses 16 through 18
gives us good advice about being balanced.
Do not be overly righteous,
nor show yourself excessively wise.
Why should you bring ruin to yourself?
Do not be excessively wicked nor be foolish.
Why should you die before your time?
It is best to grasp one warning
without letting go of the other
where the one who fears God will heed them both.
How true.
Such balance between extremes is often necessary
when we apply Bible principles.
We need to heed them both, so to speak.
We need to balance all the Bible principles
so we can come to the decision
that would show love of God and love of neighbor.
We could illustrate the balance
between different Bible principles
and applying them with this modeled bike.
It was a gift from a brother in Malawi.
Now, a bicycle has three basic principles of operation.
The brakes, the pedals, and the steering.
Now, the brakes are really like principles
that slow us down or stop us from doing the wrong thing.
And the pedals are really like the principles
that move us forward in showing love for Jehovah
and our brothers and sisters.
And the steering is like our free will
to choose a direction in life that pleases Jehovah.
So making decisions is like riding a bicycle.
We have to balance several Bible principles.
So in review, Jehovah gave us free will
to use within the boundaries of love of God
and love of neighbor
and many other fine Bible principles.
Making difficult decisions requires
that we train our power of reason
to recognize Bible principles and apply them.
And we discussed how to train our power of reason
with the three skills illustrating, analyzing, and balancing.
So no matter what decisions you're faced with,
we encourage you, let Bible principles guide you.